docs: add ua fix tutorial (#2098)
canonical/ubuntu-advantage-client: docs/tutorials/ua_fix_scenarios.md

# Using fix command to solve CVE/USNs on the machine

The Ubuntu Advantage Tools (UA) program can be used to inspect and resolve
[CVEs](https://ubuntu.com/security/cves) and [USNs](https://ubuntu.com/security/notices) (Ubuntu
Security Notices) on this machine.

Every CVE/USN is fixed by trying to upgrade all of the affected packages described by the CVE or
USN. Sometimes, the packages fixes can only be applied if an UA service is already enabled on the
machine.

> On this tutorial, we will cover the main scenarios that can happen when running the UA fix command.

Reviewer: I vote for the note - the tutorial is explaining well the "feel" of the command, and the expired contract specifically seems to be over it imho

> On this tutorial, we will cover the main scenarios that can happen when running the UA fix command.

Reviewer 2: I agree that just a note is plenty. The `sed` and everything would seem to contrived for the tutorial I think

When that happens, `ua fix` will let you know about that.
To confirm that, you can run the following fix command:

```
$ sudo ua fix USN-5079-2
```

You see that the command will prompt you like this:

```
USN-5079-2: curl vulnerabilities
Found CVEs:
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2021-22946
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2021-22947
1 affected package is installed: curl
(1/1) curl:
A fix is available in UA Infra.
The update is not installed because this system is not attached to a
subscription.

Choose: [S]ubscribe at ubuntu.com [A]ttach existing token [C]ancel
> 
```

After you confirm that the command asks for a subscription token, please enter Cancel
and let's obtain an UA token for you!

Any user with a Ubuntu One account is entitled to a free personal token to use with UA.
You can retrieve your UA token from the [advantage](https://ubuntu.com/advantage/) portal.
You will log in with your SSO credentials, the same credentials you use for
https://login.ubuntu.com. After getting your UA token let's run the command again and now
use `A` to use the token you just obtained for UA. You are expected to see now the

> following output:

Reviewer 2: Why not use the `[S]ubscribe` option? which just points to the website to do exactly this?

Also side-note bug-report: the URL printed when you type "s" is no longer valid. It points to ubuntu.com/advantage/subscribe, but should probably point to ubuntu.com/advantage

Author: I think that link it is still valid, but it is seems to be more intended for users that will use a paid subscription. That's why I have not used.

Additionally, I don't know if we should change the url for `ubuntu.com/advantage` because the subscription page seems broader. But let me know what you think

Reviewer 2: I must've somehow messed up my copy/paste because I thought /advantage/subscribe was returning 404 when I wrote that comment. :facepalm: 

If we stick with `/advantage/subscribe` then you're right we can't point a free user to that link and would need to use what you have here in the tutorial.

I think `/advantage` is actually broader though because it includes information on the free subscription as well as a link to purchase a subscription.

So if we change the link to `/advantage` then we can use the `[S]ubscribe` flow, which I think would feel more natural for the tutorial.

We can discuss more though

```

Every `ua fix` output will have a similar output structure where we describe the CVE/USN,
display the affected packages, fix the affected packages and at the end, show if the
CVE/USN is fully fixed in the machine.

You can better see this on an `ua fix` call that does fix a package. Let's install a package
on the container that we know are associated with [CVE-2020-25686](https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2020-25686).
You can install that package by running this command:

```console
$ sudo apt install dnsmasq=2.75-1
```

Now you can run the following fix command:

```console
$ sudo ua fix CVE-2020-25686
```

You will then see the following output:

```
CVE-2020-25686: Dnsmasq vulnerabilities
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2020-25686
1 affected package is installed: dnsmasq
(1/1) dnsmasq:
A fix is available in Ubuntu standard updates.
{ apt update && apt install --only-upgrade -y dnsmasq }
✔ CVE-2020-25686 is resolved.
```

> NOTE: we need to run that fix command with sudo because we are now installing a package on the system.

Whenever fix has a package to upgrade, it follows that same structure by displaying always in the
same order:

> * The affected package
> * If a fix is available and if yes, where it is located
> * Command that will fix the issue

Reviewer 2: Since we're calling out order as important for this list, let's use a numbered list.

Also suggest breaking (2) into two steps
```suggestion
1. The affected package
2. The availability of a fix
3. The location of the fix, if one is available
4. The command that will fix the issue
```

Also, in the end of the output is the confirmation that the CVE was fixed by the command.

> You can confirm that fix was successfully applied by running the same `ua fix` command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can confirm that fix was successfully applied by running the same `ua fix` command again:
```

```
CVE-2020-25686: Dnsmasq vulnerabilities
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2020-25686
1 affected package is installed: dnsmasq
(1/1) dnsmasq:
A fix is available in Ubuntu standard updates.
The update is already installed.
✔ CVE-2020-25686 is resolved.
```

## CVE/USN without released fix

Some CVE/USNs do not have a fix released yet. When that happens, `ua fix` will let you know
about this situation. You can confirm that by running the following command:

```
$ ua fix USN-4539-1
```

You will see the following output:

```
USN-4539-1: AWL vulnerability
Found CVEs:
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2020-11728
1 affected source package is installed: awl
(1/1) awl:
Sorry, no fix is available.
1 package is still affected: awl
✘ USN-4539-1 is not resolved.
```

Notice that we inform that the is no fix available and in the last line the commands also
mentions that the USN is not resolved.

## CVE/USN that require an UA subscription

Some package fixes can only be installed when the machine is attached to an UA subscription.
When that happens, `ua fix` will let you know about that.

> To confirm that, you can run the following fix command:

Reviewer 2: suggested newline is intentional :)
```suggestion

To see an example of this scenario, you can run the following fix command:
```

```
$ sudo ua fix USN-5079-2
```

> You see that the command will prompt you like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will see that the command will prompt you like this:
```

> `ua fix` will detect that and prompt you to attach a new token for your machine.

## CVE/USN that requires an UA service

Now, let's assume that you have attached to an UA subscription, but when running a fix
command, the required service that fixes the issue is not enabled. In that situation, `ua fix` will
also prompt you to enable that service.

To confirm that, run the following command to disable `esm-infra`:

```console
$ sudo ua disable esm-infra
```

Now, you can run the following fix command:

```console
$ sudo ua fix CVE-2021-44731
```

And you should see the following output (if you type `E` when prompted):

```
CVE-2021-44731: snapd vulnerabilities
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2021-44731
1 affected package is installed: snapd
(1/1) snapd:
A fix is available in UA Infra.
The update is not installed because this system does not have
esm-infra enabled.

Choose: [E]nable esm-infra [C]ancel
> E
{ ua enable esm-infra }
One moment, checking your subscription first
Updating package lists
UA Infra: ESM enabled
{ apt update && apt install --only-upgrade -y ubuntu-core-launcher snapd }
✔ CVE-2021-44731 is resolved.
```

> You can observe that the required service was enabled and fix was able to successfully upgrade

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can observe that the required service was enabled and `ua fix` was able to successfully upgrade
```

the affected package.

## CVE/USN that requires reboot

When running an `ua fix` command, sometimes we can install a package that requires
a system reboot to complete. The fix command can detect that and will inform you
about it.

You can confirm this by running the following fix command:

```console
$ sudo ua fix CVE-2022-0778
```

Then you will see the following output:

```
VE-2022-0778: OpenSSL vulnerability
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2022-0778
1 affected package is installed: openssl
(1/1) openssl:
A fix is available in UA Infra.
{ apt update && apt install --only-upgrade -y libssl1.0.0 openssl }
A reboot is required to complete fix operation.
✘ CVE-2022-0778 is not resolved.
```

If we reboot the machine and run the command again, you will see that it is indeed fixed:

```
CVE-2022-0778: OpenSSL vulnerability
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2022-0778
1 affected package is installed: openssl
(1/1) openssl:
A fix is available in UA Infra.
The update is already installed.
✔ CVE-2022-0778 is resolved.
```

## Partially resolved CVE/USNs

> Finally, you can run a fix command that only partially fix some of the packages affected.
> This happens when only a subset of the packages are fixed for that CVE/USN. You will see
> that `ua fix` will inform you about that.

Reviewer 2: This makes sense but subtly implies that the user might do this on purpose (via the "you can ..." phrase) which isn't quite what we want.
Suggested re-write:
```suggestion
Finally, you might run a fix command that only partially fixes some of the packages affected.
This happens when only a subset of the packages have available updates to fix that CVE/USN.
In this case, `ua fix` will inform you of which packages it can and cannot fix.
```

But first, let's install some package so we can run a fix command to exercise that scenario.

```console
$ sudo apt-get install expat=2.1.0-7 swish-e matanza ghostscript
```

Now, you can run the following fix command:

```console
$ sudo ua fix CVE-2017-9233
```

And you will see the following command:

```
CVE-2017-9233: Expat vulnerability
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2017-9233
3 affected packages are installed: expat, matanza, swish-e
(1/3, 2/3) matanza, swish-e:
Sorry, no fix is available.
(3/3) expat:
A fix is available in Ubuntu standard updates.
{ apt update && apt install --only-upgrade -y expat }
2 packages are still affected: matanza, swish-e
✘ CVE-2017-9233 is not resolved.
```

We can see that two packages, `matanza` and `swish-e`, don't have any fixes available, but there
is one for expat. In that scenario, we install the fix for `expat` and report at the end that

> some packages are still affected. Also, observe that is this scenario we mark the CVE/USN as not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
some packages are still affected. Also, observe that in this scenario we mark the CVE/USN as not
```

you to run that command on your Xenial LXD container.

## Using UA fix

First, let's see what happens on your system when `ua fix` runs. We will choose
to fix a CVE that does not affect the Xenial container,
[CVE-2020-15180](https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2020-15180). This CVE address security
issues for the `MariaDB` package, which is not installed on the system. Let's confirm that
it doesn't affect the system by running this command:

```console
$ ua fix CVE-2020-15180
```

You should see an output like this one:

```
CVE-2020-15180: MariaDB vulnerabilities
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2020-15180
No affected source packages are installed.
✔ CVE-2020-15180 does not affect your system.
```

Every `ua fix` output will have a similar output structure where we describe the CVE/USN,
display the affected packages, fix the affected packages and at the end, show if the
CVE/USN is fully fixed in the machine.

You can better see this on an `ua fix` call that does fix a package. Let's install a package
on the container that we know are associated with [CVE-2020-25686](https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2020-25686).
You can install that package by running this command:

```console

> $ sudo apt install dnsmasq=2.75-1

Reviewer 2: I think you might need an `apt update` before this will work in a fresh container

Author: Good catch

```

Now you can run the following command:

```console
$ sudo ua fix CVE-2020-25686
```

You will then see the following output:

```
CVE-2020-25686: Dnsmasq vulnerabilities
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2020-25686
1 affected package is installed: dnsmasq
(1/1) dnsmasq:
A fix is available in Ubuntu standard updates.
{ apt update && apt install --only-upgrade -y dnsmasq }
✔ CVE-2020-25686 is resolved.
```

> > NOTE: we need to run the command with sudo because we are now installing a package on the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note**
> We need to run the command with sudo because we are now installing a package on the system.
```

Whenever `ua fix` has a package to upgrade, it follows a consistent structure and displays the
following in order

1. The affected package
2. The availability of a fix
3. The location of the fix, if one is available
4. The command that will fix the issue

Also, in the end of the output is the confirmation that the CVE was fixed by the command.
You can confirm that fix was successfully applied by running the same `ua fix` command again:

```
CVE-2020-25686: Dnsmasq vulnerabilities
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2020-25686
1 affected package is installed: dnsmasq
(1/1) dnsmasq:
A fix is available in Ubuntu standard updates.
The update is already installed.
✔ CVE-2020-25686 is resolved.
```

## CVE/USN without released fix

Some CVE/USNs do not have a fix released yet. When that happens, `ua fix` will let you know
about this situation. You can confirm that by running the following command:

```
$ ua fix USN-4539-1
```

You will see the following output:

```
USN-4539-1: AWL vulnerability
Found CVEs:
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2020-11728
1 affected source package is installed: awl
(1/1) awl:

> Sorry, no fix is available.

Reviewer 2: do we need to instruct the user to install something in order to see this?

Author: Good catch again

1 package is still affected: awl
✘ USN-4539-1 is not resolved.
```

Notice that we inform that the is no fix available and in the last line the commands also
mentions that the USN is not resolved.

## CVE/USN that require an UA subscription

Some package fixes can only be installed when the machine is attached to an UA subscription.
When that happens, `ua fix` will let you know about that. To see an example of this scenario,
you can run the following fix command:

```
$ sudo ua fix USN-5079-2
```

You will see that the command will prompt you like this:

```
USN-5079-2: curl vulnerabilities
Found CVEs:
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2021-22946
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2021-22947
1 affected package is installed: curl
(1/1) curl:
A fix is available in UA Infra.
The update is not installed because this system is not attached to a
subscription.

Choose: [S]ubscribe at ubuntu.com [A]ttach existing token [C]ancel
> 
```

> You can see that the prompt is asking for a UA subscription token. Any user with
> a Ubuntu One account is entitled to a free personal token to use with UA. You can
> If you choose the `Subscribe` option on the prompt, the command will ask you to go
> to the [advantage](https://ubuntu.com/advantage/) portal. You can go into that portal
> and get yourself a free subscription token. You can log in with your
> SSO credentials, the same credentials you use for https://login.ubuntu.com.
> After getting your UA token, you can hit `Enter` on the prompt and it will ask you
> to provide the token you just obtained. After entering the token you are expected to
> see now the following output:

Reviewer 2: Some nits
```suggestion
You can see that the prompt is asking for a UA subscription token. Any user with
a Ubuntu One account is entitled to a free personal token to use with UA.
If you choose the `Subscribe` option on the prompt, the command will ask you to go
to the [advantage](https://ubuntu.com/advantage/) portal. You can go to that portal
and get yourself a free subscription token by logging in with your
SSO credentials, the same credentials you use for https://login.ubuntu.com.

After getting your UA token, you can hit `Enter` on the prompt and it will ask you
to provide the token you just obtained. After entering the token you should see
the following output:
```

Reviewer 2: This isn't giving the nice highlights of what changed for some reason :(

The main changes were deleting the seemingly extra `You can` at the end of the second line. And add a newline before "After getting your UA token"

esm-infra     yes       enabled   UA Infra: Extended Security Maintenance (ESM)
fips          yes       n/a       NIST-certified core packages
fips-updates  yes       n/a       NIST-certified core packages with priority security updates
livepatch     yes       n/a       Canonical Livepatch service

NOTICES
Operation in progress: ua attach

Enable services with: ua enable <service>

                Account: UA Client Test
           Subscription: SUBSCRIPTION
            Valid until: 9999-12-31 00:00:00+00:00
Technical support level: essential
{ apt update && apt install --only-upgrade -y curl libcurl3-gnutls }
✔ USN-5079-2 is resolved.
```

We can see that that the attach command was successful, which can be verified by
the status output we see when executing the command. Additionally, we can also observe
that the USN is indeed fixed, which you can confirm by running the command again:

```
N-5079-2: curl vulnerabilities
Found CVEs:
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2021-22946
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2021-22947
1 affected package is installed: curl
(1/1) curl:
A fix is available in UA Infra.
The update is already installed.
✔ USN-5079-2 is resolved.
```

> > NOTE: Even though we are not covering this scenario here, if you have an expired contract,
> > `ua fix` will detect that and prompt you to attach a new token for your machine.

Reviewer 2: Let's use the new github syntax to get the color and symbol
```suggestion
> **Note**
> Even though we are not covering this scenario here, if you have an expired contract,
> `ua fix` will detect that and prompt you to attach a new token for your machine.
```

A fix is available in UA Infra.
The update is already installed.
✔ CVE-2022-0778 is resolved.
```

## Partially resolved CVE/USNs

Finally, you might run a `ua fix` command that only partially fixes some of the packages affected.
This happens when only a subset of the packages have available updates to fix for that CVE/USN.
In this case, `ua fix` will inform of which package it can and cannot fix.

But first, let's install some package so we can run `ua fix` to exercise that scenario.

```console
$ sudo apt-get install expat=2.1.0-7 swish-e matanza ghostscript
```

Now, you can run the following command:

```console
$ sudo ua fix CVE-2017-9233
```

And you will see the following command:

```
CVE-2017-9233: Expat vulnerability
https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2017-9233
3 affected packages are installed: expat, matanza, swish-e
(1/3, 2/3) matanza, swish-e:
Sorry, no fix is available.
(3/3) expat:
A fix is available in Ubuntu standard updates.
{ apt update && apt install --only-upgrade -y expat }
2 packages are still affected: matanza, swish-e
✘ CVE-2017-9233 is not resolved.
```

We can see that two packages, `matanza` and `swish-e`, don't have any fixes available, but there

> is one for expat. In that scenario, we install the fix for `expat` and report at the end that
>     some packages are still affected. Also, observe that in this scenario we mark the CVE/USN as not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is one for `expat`. In that scenario, we install the fix for `expat` and report at the end that
some packages are still affected. Also, observe that in this scenario we mark the CVE/USN as not
```
